= Sequel PostgreSQL Triggers

Sequel PostgreSQL Triggers is a small enhancement to Sequel allowing
a user to easily handle the following types of columns:

* Timestamp Columns (Created At/Updated At)
* Counter/Sum Caches
* Immutable Columns
* Touch Propogation
* Foreign Key Arrays (Referential Integrity Checks)

It handles these internally to the database via triggers, so even if
other applications access the database (without using Sequel), things
will still work (unless the database superuser disables triggers).

To use this, load the +pg_triggers+ extension into the Sequel::Database
object:

  DB.extension :pg_triggers

Then you can call the pgt_* methods it adds on your Sequel::Database
object:

  DB.pgt_created_at(:table_name, :created_at)

Most commonly, this is used in migrations, with a structure similar
to:

  Sequel.migration do
    up do
      extension :pg_triggers

      pgt_created_at(:table_name,
                     :created_at,
                     :function_name=>:table_name_set_created_at,
                     :trigger_name=>:set_created_at)
    end

    down do
      drop_trigger(:table_name, :set_created_at)
      drop_function(:table_name_set_created_at)
    end
  end

Note that you only need to load this extension when defining the
triggers, you don't need to load this extension when your
application is running.

To use any of these methods before PostgreSQL 9.0, you have to add
the plpgsql procedural language to PostgreSQL, which you can do with:

  DB.create_language(:plpgsql)

If you want to load this extension globally for all PostgreSQL
databases, you can do:

  require 'sequel_postgresql_triggers'

However, global modification is discouraged and only remains for
backwards compatibility.

== Triggers

All of the public methods this extension adds take the following options
in their opts hash:

:function_name :: The name of the function to use.  This is important
                  to specify if you want an easy way to drop the function.
:trigger_name :: The name of the trigger to use.  This is important
                 to specify if you want an easy way to drop the trigger.

=== Created At Columns - pgt_created_at

pgt_created_at takes the table and column given and makes it so that
upon insertion, the column is set to the CURRENT_TIMESTAMP, and that
upon update, the column's value is always set to the previous value.
This is sort of like an immutable column, but it doesn't bring up an
error if you try to change it, it just ignores it.

Arguments:
table :: name of table
column :: column in table that should be a created at timestamp column
opts :: option hash

=== Updated At Columns - pgt_updated_at

Similar to pgt_created_at, takes a table and column and makes it so
that upon insertion, the column is set to CURRENT_TIMESTAMP. It
differs that upon update, the column is also set to CURRENT_TIMESTAMP.

Arguments:
table :: name of table
column :: column in table that should be a updated at timestamp column
opts :: options hash

=== Counter Cache - pgt_counter_cache

This takes many arguments and sets up a
counter cache so that when the counted table is inserted to
or deleted from, records in the main table are updated with the
count of the corresponding records in the counted table.  The counter
cache column must have a default of 0 for this to work correctly.

Use pgt_sum_cache with a Sequel expression in summed_column to
handle any custom logic such as a counter cache that only counts
certain rows.

Arguments:
main_table :: name of table holding counter cache column
main_table_id_column :: column in main table matching counted_table_id_column in counted_table
counter_column :: column in main table containing the counter cache
counted_table :: name of table being counted
counted_table_id_column :: column in counted_table matching main_table_id_column in main_table
opts :: options hash

=== Sum Cache - pgt_sum_cache

Similar to pgt_counter_cache, except instead of storing a count
of records in the main table, it stores the sum on one of the
columns in summed table. The sum cache column must have a default
of 0 for this to work correctly.

Use a Sequel expression in summed_column to handle any custom
logic such as a counter cache that only counts certain rows, or a
sum cache that sums the length of a string column.

Arguments:
main_table :: name of table holding counter cache column
main_table_id_column :: column in main table matching counted_table_id_column in counted_table
sum_column :: column in main table containing the sum cache
summed_table :: name of table being summed
summed_table_id_column :: column in summed_table matching main_table_id_column in main_table
summed_column :: column in summed_table being summed or a Sequel expression to be evaluated in the context of summed_table
opts :: options hash

=== Sum Through Many Cache - pgt_sum_through_many_cache

Similar to pgt_sum_cache, except instead of a one-to-many relationship,
it supports a many-to-many relationship with a single join table. The
sum cache column must have a default of 0 for this to work correctly.
Use a Sequel expression in summed_column to handle any custom logic.
See pgt_sum_cache for details.

This takes a single options hash argument, supporting the following options
in addition to the standard options:
:main_table :: name of table holding sum cache column
:main_table_id_column :: primary key column in main table referenced by main_table_fk_column (default: :id)
:sum_column :: column in main table containing the sum cache, must be NOT NULL and default to 0
:summed_table :: name of table being summed
:summed_table_id_column :: primary key column in summed_table referenced by summed_table_fk_column (default: :id)
:summed_column :: column in summed_table being summed or a Sequel expression to be evaluated in the context of summed_table, must be NOT NULL
:join_table :: name of table which joins main_table with summed_table
:join_trigger_name :: name of trigger for join table
:join_function_name :: name of trigger function for join table
:main_table_fk_column :: column in join_table referencing main_table_id_column, must be NOT NULL
:summed_table_fk_column :: column in join_table referencing summed_table_id_column, must be NOT NULL

=== Immutable Columns - pgt_immutable

This takes a table name and one or more column names, and adds
an update trigger that raises an exception if you try to modify
the value of any of the columns.

Arguments:
table :: name of table
*columns :: All columns in the table that should be immutable.  Can end with options hash.

=== Touch Propagation - pgt_touch

This takes several arguments and sets up a
trigger that watches one table for changes, and touches timestamps
of related rows in a separate table.

Arguments:
main_table :: name of table that is being watched for changes
touch_table :: name of table that needs to be touched
column :: name of timestamp column to be touched
expr :: hash or array that represents the columns that define the relationship
opts :: options hash

=== Foreign Key Arrays - pgt_foreign_key_array

This takes a single options hash, and sets up triggers on both
tables involved.  The table with the foreign key array has insert/update
triggers to make sure newly inserted/updated rows reference valid rows
in the referenced table.  The table being referenced has update/delete
triggers to make sure the value before update or delete is not still
being referenced.

Note that this will not catch all referential integrity violations, but
it should catch the most common ones.

Options:
:table :: table with foreign key array
:column :: foreign key array column
:referenced_table :: table referenced by foreign key array
:referenced_column :: column referenced by foreign key array (generally primary key)
:referenced_function_name :: function name for trigger function on referenced table
:referenced_trigger_name :: trigger name for referenced table

=== Force Defaults - pgt_force_defaults

This takes 2 arguments, a table and a hash of column default values, and sets
up an insert trigger that will override user submitted or database
default values and use the values given when setting up the trigger.
This is mostly useful in situations where multiple database accounts
are used where one account has insert permissions but not update
permissions, and you want to ensure that inserted rows have specific
column values to enforce security requirements.

Arguments:
table :: The name of the table
defaults :: A hash of default values to enforce, where keys are column names
            and values are the default values to enforce

=== JSON Audit Logging - pgt_json_audit_log_setup and pg_json_audit_log

These methods setup an auditing function where updates and deletes log
the previous values to a central auditing table in JSON format.

==== pgt_json_audit_log_setup

This creates an audit table and a trigger function that will log
previous values to the audit table. This returns the name of the
trigger function created, which should be passed to
+pgt_json_audit_log+.

Arguments:
table :: The name of the table storing the audit logs.

Options:
function_opts :: Options to pass to +create_function+ when creating
                 the trigger function.

The audit log table will store the following columns:

txid :: The 64-bit transaction ID for the transaction that made the modification (txid_current())
at :: The timestamp of the transaction that made the modification (CURRENT_TIMESTAMP)
user :: The database user name that made the modification (CURRENT_USER)
schema :: The schema containing the table that was modified (TG_TABLE_SCHEMA)
table :: The table that was modified (TG_TABLE_NAME)
action :: The type of modification, either DELETE or UPDATE (TG_OP)
prior :: A jsonb column with the contents of the row before the modification (to_jsonb(OLD))

==== pgt_json_audit_log

This adds a trigger to the table that will log previous values to the
audting table for updates and deletes.

Arguments:
table :: The name of the table to audit
function :: The name of the trigger function to call to log changes

Note that it is probably a bad idea to use the same table argument
to both +pgt_json_audit_log_setup+ and +pgt_json_audit_log+.

== License

This library is released under the MIT License.  See the MIT-LICENSE
file for details.

== Author

Jeremy Evans <code@jeremyevans.net>
